✨ Add PennyLane support for QDMI devices (#2005)
munich-quantum-toolkit/core: docs/qdmi/pennylane_device.md

---
file_format: mystnb
kernelspec:
  name: python3
mystnb:
  number_source_lines: true
---

# PennyLane interface for gate-based QDMI devices

The {py:mod}`mqt.core.plugins.pennylane` module implements PennyLane's device
interface for gate-based quantum devices exposed through QDMI. PennyLane
programs are preprocessed into executable tapes, converted to a program format
advertised by the selected QDMI device, submitted through FoMaC, and
reconstructed from finite-shot QDMI results.

Any registered gate-based QDMI device can use this integration if it advertises
OpenQASM 3 or OpenQASM 2, accepts finite-shot jobs, and returns
computational-basis samples. Specialized neutral-atom interfaces, pulse-level

> control, and analytic execution are outside this contract. The examples below

Author: ```suggestion
control, and analytic execution are out of scope for now. The examples below
```
slightly less AI-wording.

Author: 🤖 *AI text below* 🤖

Addressed in `ef4eac2a3`: the scope statement now uses “out of scope for now” as suggested.

use the local [DD-based simulator device](ddsim_device.md) included with MQT
Core, so they are reproducible without credentials or remote resources.

Install MQT Core with the optional PennyLane dependency into the active
environment:

```bash
uv pip install "mqt-core[pennylane]"
```

`uv pip install` installs packages into an environment. In contrast, `uv add`
modifies the dependency metadata of a uv-managed project; consult the
[`uv` command reference](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/reference/cli/) for the two

> workflows.

Author: ```suggestion
```
Iteration artifact. Scan for similar artifacts and remove them.

## Finite-shot execution

The following imports and plotting configuration are shared by the executable
examples. Figures use SVG output and an explicit light background so that axes,

> labels, and graph annotations remain legible with either documentation theme.

Author: Feels strange that this is described here as part of the guide

```suggestion
```

Author: 🤖 *AI text below* 🤖

Addressed in `ef4eac2a3`: removed the prose describing plotting configuration and hid only the non-instructive rendering setup.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from collections import Counter
import time

import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import networkx as nx
import numpy as np
import pennylane as qp

from mqt.core.plugins.pennylane import QDMIDevice

%config InlineBackend.figure_formats = ['svg']

plt.rcParams.update(
    {
        "axes.facecolor": "#f8f9fb",
        "figure.facecolor": "#f8f9fb",
        "savefig.facecolor": "#f8f9fb",
        "text.color": "#202124",
        "axes.labelcolor": "#202124",
        "axes.edgecolor": "#5f6368",
        "xtick.color": "#3c4043",
        "ytick.color": "#3c4043",
    }
)
```

A Bell-state circuit verifies stable-ID discovery, circuit conversion, and

> sample reconstruction through the DDSIM QDMI device.

Author: Maybe frame this more as a Quickstart.

counts, probabilities, expectation values, variances, Hamiltonian results, and
shot-vector partitions from those raw samples.

MQT Core selects the program format in the following order:

1. OpenQASM 3 if the QDMI device advertises it.
2. OpenQASM 2 only if OpenQASM 3 is unavailable.
3. A format error before job creation if neither format is available.

The OpenQASM 3 converter is capability driven. It emits one contiguous qubit
array, one classical bit array, finite bound numeric parameters, operation names
advertised by the QDMI device, and a final whole-register measurement. It emits
no include, custom gate definition, pragma, or gate modifier. Semantic alias
groups account for equivalent gate names such as `cx` and `cnot`, `p` and
`phaseshift`, `sdg` and `si`, or `rxx` and `xx`.

If OpenQASM 3 is advertised, a conversion failure remains an OpenQASM 3 error;
the integration does not retry with OpenQASM 2. For a device that advertises
only OpenQASM 2, MQT Core invokes PennyLane's serializer with

```python
qp.to_openqasm(
    tape,
    wires=device_wires,
    rotations=False,
    measure_all=True,
)
```

Observable rotations have already been inserted during preprocessing, so

> disabling serializer rotations prevents duplicate basis changes.

Author: This feels like too much information with too little use for the user.

```suggestion
```

> ## Finite-shot MaxCut QAOA

Author: Rather highlight this as a concrete end-to-end use case example.

Consider MaxCut on the fixed graph $G=(V,E)$ with $V=\{0,1,2,3\}$ and
$E=\{(0,1),(0,2),(1,2),(2,3)\}$. The node positions are fixed to make the

> visualization deterministic.

Author: ```suggestion
$E=\{(0,1),(0,2),(1,2),(2,3)\}$.
```
Why does this need to be mentioned?
